.. _pe_0170_changelog:

PE Changelog for LIEF 0.17.0
============================

Compared to LIEF v0.16.X, version 0.17.0 includes a significant refactoring
of the PE parser and builder. These changes were necessary to align
the PE functionalities of LIEF with those of ELF and Mach-O. If your codebase
uses LIEF to process PE binaries, you may encounter issues when
upgrading to LIEF 0.17.0. This page provides a comprehensive overview of the
various changes, but it cannot cover every detail. If you encounter an API issue
that is not described here, you can:

1. Join Discord and ask your questions: |lief-discord|
2. Review the git diff of the tests. Most of these changes are covered by tests,
   so you should be able to find a relevant example.
3. Email me at: ``me[at]romainthomas.fr``

PE Modifications
----------------

To explore the new modifications features, you can check the following pages:

.. toctree::
  :maxdepth: 1

  ../formats/pe/modifications/imports
  ../formats/pe/modifications/resources
  ../formats/pe/modifications/tls
  ../formats/pe/modifications/debug
  ../formats/pe/modifications/exports

COFF String & COFF Symbol
-------------------------

As described in issue: :issue:`1043`, if a section's name exceeds
8 bytes, the linker may allocate a longer name in the
COFF string pool while setting the section's name with the offset in the COFF
string pool.

You can access this COFF string using |lief-pe-section-coff_string|, while
the string representing the offset (e.g. ``/230``) remains in the
section's name.

Additionally, optional COFF symbols, along with any auxiliary symbols, are now
processed correctly by LIEF:

.. code-block:: python

  import lief

  pe = lief.PE.parse("libLIEF.dll")
  section = pe.sections[10]
  print(section.name) # --> '/19'
  print(section.coff_string) # --> '.debug_info'

  for symbol in pe.symbols:
      print(symbol.name)
      for aux in symbol.auxiliary_symbols:
          print(aux)

Although this example is written in Python, the API is also available in C++
and Rust.

Load Configuration
------------------

The ``IMAGE_LOAD_CONFIG_DIRECTORY`` structures, represented in LIEF by
|lief-pe-loadconfig|, regularly evolves with new Windows releases.
A new version of Windows may introduce new attributes to accommodate additional
functionalities like Control Flow Guard. To manage these changes, |lief-pe-loadconfig|
previously used a form of inheritance. For each new attribute, a new class, such
as ``LoadConfigurationV12``, would inherit from ``LoadConfigurationV11``.
This approach, though systematic, resulted in numerous modifications -- especially
in Rust -- raising questions about the decision to use inheritance.

Starting from LIEF v0.17.0, |lief-pe-loadconfig| has adopted a **flat** representation.
In this new model, version-dependent attributes are represented with an ``option<>``-like
container.

.. tabs::

  .. tab:: :fa:`brands fa-python` Python

      .. code-block:: python

        import lief

        pe = lief.PE.parse("demo.exe")
        offset: Optional[int] = pe.load_configuration.hotpatch_table_offset

  .. tab:: :fa:`regular fa-file-code` C++

      .. code-block:: cpp

        auto pe = LIEF::PE::Parser::parse("demo.exe");

        if (const LoadConfiguration* lconf = pe->load_configuration()) {
          LIEF::optional<uint32_t> offset = lconf->hotpatch_table_offset();
        }

  .. tab:: :fa:`brands fa-rust` Rust

      .. code-block:: rust

        if let Some(lief::Binary::PE(pe)) = lief::Binary::parse("demo.exe") {
            if let Some(lconf) = pe.load_configuration() {
              let offset: Option<u32> = lconf.hotpatch_table_offset();
            }
        }

Additionally, the |lief-pe-loadconfig| now provides an API that allows access to
the internal data associated with this structure:

- |lief-pe-chpe_metadata|
- |lief-pe-dynamic-relocation|
- |lief-pe-enclave-configuration|
- |lief-pe-volatile-metadata|

Some of these structures are important to correctly support ARM64EC/ARM64X
PE Binary (\#teasing).

Debug Information
-----------------

LIEF version 0.17.0 can manage larger types of debug entries and provides a
user-friendly API:

- |lief-pe-vcfeature|
- |lief-pe-fpo|
- |lief-pe-exdllcharacteristics|
- |lief-pe-pdbchecksum|

As described in the section: :ref:`Debug Modification <pe_debug_modification>`
you can modify debug entries to perform various actions:

.. code-block:: python

  pe = lief.PE.parse("some.dll")
  # Changing the PDB file path into an URL
  pe.codeview_pdb.filename = "https://lief.re/"
  pe.write("out.dll")


Resources
---------

Some interfaces exposed by the |lief-pe-resource-manager| have been redesigned
to make them more consistent with their underlying representation in the PE
format.

For instance, ``lief.PE.LangCodeItem`` has been renamed and refactored into
|lief-pe-resourcestringtable|.

Resources-related enums have been re-scoped to avoid definition conflicts
between Windows's headers and LIEF:

+------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``lief.PE.EXTENDED_WINDOW_STYLES``       | :class:`lief.PE.ResourceDialog.WINDOW_EXTENDED_STYLES`               |
+==========================================+======================================================================+
| ``lief.PE.WINDOW_STYLES``                | :class:`lief.PE.ResourceDialog.WINDOW_STYLES`                        |
+------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``lief.PE.DIALOG_BOX_STYLES``            | :class:`lief.PE.ResourceDialog.DIALOG_STYLES`                        |
+------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``lief.PE.FIXED_VERSION_OS``             | :class:`lief.PE.ResourceVersion.fixed_file_info_t.VERSION_OS`        |
+------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``lief.PE.FIXED_VERSION_FILE_FLAGS``     | :class:`lief.PE.ResourceVersion.fixed_file_info_t.FILE_FLAGS`        |
+------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``lief.PE.FIXED_VERSION_FILE_SUB_TYPES`` | :class:`lief.PE.ResourceVersion.fixed_file_info_t.FILE_TYPE_DETAILS` |
+------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``lief.PE.ACCELERATOR_FLAGS``            | :class:`lief.PE.ResourceAccelerator.FLAGS`                           |
+------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``lief.PE.ACCELERATOR_VK_CODES``         | :class:`lief.PE.ACCELERATOR_CODES`                                   |
+------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Exception Info
--------------

For x86-64 and ARM64 PE binaries, stack unwinding information is referenced by
the data directory: ``IMAGE_DIRECTORY_ENTRY_EXCEPTION``. Even if your code is
compiled without exception support, this information may still be generated by the linker.

The entries of this data directory are represented by the
|lief-pe-exceptioninfo| structure which is specialized for x64 and
ARM64 functions. Regardless of the underlying architecture, each entry in this
table exposes a function RVA.
From a reverse engineering perspective, these RVAs offer a valuable set of
function start addresses that can be used to begin disassembling the binary..

Given a |lief-pe-binary| instance, one can iterate over these |lief-pe-exceptioninfo|
using |lief-pe-binary-exceptions|:

.. code-block:: python

   pe = lief.PE.parse("Windows.Media.Protection.PlayReady.dll", lief.PE.ParserConfgi.all)
   print(pe.exceptions[10])

.. code-block:: text

  RuntimeFunctionX64 {
    RVA: [0x0c9350, 0x0c9382] (50 bytes)
    Unwind info RVA: 0x68eb5c
    unwind_info_t {
      Version: 1
      Flags: 0
      Size of prologue: 20
      Nb opcodes: 8 (6)
      Opcodes: [
        0x14 SAVE_NONVOL reg=RDI, offset=0x000078
        0x14 SAVE_NONVOL reg=RBX, offset=0x000070
        0x14 ALLOC_SMALL size=64
        0x10 PUSH_NONVOL reg=R15
        0x0e PUSH_NONVOL reg=R14
        0x0c PUSH_NONVOL reg=R12
      ];
    }
  }

.. code-block:: python

   pe = lief.PE.parse("win11_arm64x_Windows.Media.Protection.PlayReady.dll", lief.PE.ParserConfgi.all)
   print(pe.exceptions[10])

.. code-block:: text

  Runtime Unpacked AArch64 Function {
    Range(RVA): 0x00822bb8 - 0x00822c08
    Unwind location (RVA): 0x00d63838
    Length=80 Vers=0 X=0 E=0, CodeWords=8
    Epilogs=1
    Prolog unwind:
      0x0000 e1...... mov fp, sp
      0x0001 81...... stp x29, x30, [sp, #-16]!
      0x0002 e6...... save next
      0x0003 e6...... save next
      0x0004 e6...... save next
      0x0005 e6...... save next
      0x0006 e76689.. stp q6, q7, [sp, #-160]!
      0x0009 fc...... pacibsp
      0x000a e4...... end
    Epilog #1 unwind:  (Offset=10, Index=11, Reserved=0)
      0x0000 81...... ldp x29, x30, [sp], #16
      0x0001 e74e88.. ldp q14, q15, [sp, #128]
      0x0004 e74c86.. ldp q12, q13, [sp, #96]
      0x0007 e74a84.. ldp q10, q11, [sp, #64]
      0x000a e74882.. ldp q8, q9, [sp, #32]
      0x000d e76689.. ldp q6, q7, [sp], #160
      0x0010 fc...... autibsp
      0x0011 e3...... nop
      0x0012 e3...... nop
      0x0013 e4...... end
  }

.. admonition:: ARM64 - ``SAVE_ANY_REG``
  :class: tip

  Thank you to `Eli Friedman <https://github.com/efriedma-quic>`_ and `Martin Storsjö <https://github.com/mstorsjo>`_
  for their work on reverse engineering this undocumented unwind opcode.

LIEF provides a detailed API for the underlying structures involved in PE
exception and stack unwinding support.

.. admonition:: Performance Considerations
  :class: warning

  In-depth analysis of exceptions metadata can introduce significant overhead.
  Therefore, |lief-pe-parser-config-parse_exceptions| must be
  **explicitly** enabled.

ARM64EC / ARM64X
----------------

With the recent release of SnapDragon X, ARM64-based Windows computers are
becoming increasingly popular. This shift introduces some changes to
the PE format. One notable change is the introduction of ARM64X binaries, which
can be compared to the Mach-O FAT concept, where a single binary contains multiple
architectures.

In the case of ARM64X, a single PE file encapsulates ARM64 and ARM64EC architectures.
LIEF v0.17.0 exposes the following helpers to determine whether the binary is
ARM64X or ARM64EC: |lief-pe-binary-is_arm64ec|, |lief-pe-binary-is_arm64x|.

For an ARM64X binary, you can use |lief-pe-binary-nested_pe_binary| to access the
embedded ARM64EC **representation** of the binary.

.. admonition:: Performance Considerations
  :class: warning

  Parsing nested ARM64EC binary can introduce additional overhead compared to
  the 0.16.X version.
  Therefore, |lief-pe-parser-config-parse_arm64x_binary| feature must be
  **explicitly** enabled.

Other Changes
-------------

The workaround involving ``undef.h`` has been removed. This file was used to ``#undef``
certain Windows defines that conflicted with LIEF enum definitions. You can now
safely include Windows headers alongside LIEF headers. If you encounter any
conflicts, please report the issue..

The *builder* engine has been refactored to resolve numerous errors and bugs
associated with PE modifications. It now uses a more conservative approach.
For more details, please refer to the :ref:`PE <format-pe>` page.

The *"PE from Scratch"* feature is no longer available as it had significant bugs
that often resulted in corrupted binaries. This feature will be reintroduced
later in the project. If you rely on this feature, please reach out.

:List of changes:

  * Fix missing original forwarded function name (:issue:`1166`)

  * |lief-pe-datadirectory| is now exposing |lief-pe-datadirectory-content| to
    access the raw bytes wrapped by the data directory

  * PE's resource tree can now be parsed in a standalone way using
    |lief-pe-resource-node-parse|.

    .. code-block:: python

      resource_tree = bytes("....")
      original_rva = 0x20000
      tree: lief.PE.ResourceNode = lief.PE.ResourceNode.parse(resource_tree, original_rva)

.. include:: ../_cross_api.rst
